---
layout: post
title: Console Post Mortem
date: 2020-09-08 14:00 -0700
hide_table_of_contents: true
authors: [jdgemm]
---

On 8/12 the system changed the token allocation providing rewards for Hotspots that transferred data
and required devices to pay for network traffic with Data Credits.

<!--truncate-->

An arbitrage situation was created that allowed users to earn a disproportionately high amount of
HNT for sending packets and the network experienced a significant spike in both number of devices
(>3x), and amount of traffic (>10x).

This caused a number of Console and Router issues. The main challenge wasn’t the amount of traffic
hitting the system. Rather the complexity involved in the interaction among devices, Hotspots, and
Router and the synchronization required for state channels to maintain an accurate accounting of
traffic sent across a decentralized network.

This level of stress testing allowed us to identify and fix issues that would have been impossible
to simulate in a lab/staging environment. Here’s a breakdown of the main categories of issues and
their fixes.

### Console

Console is the front end interface between the backend (Router) and the blockchain. The additional
traffic from Router to Console caused performance issues including ‘Data Failed to Load” messages.

#### Issues and fixes

Issue: Delays viewing device pages, Device index, sometimes resulting in the Data Failed to Load
message.

Fix: The database was updated to handle the additional communication between Router and Console.

Issue: Burn HNT transaction was successful, but the Data Credit balance did not update.

Fix: The memo field changed to dynamically update, and communication between Router and Console for
HNT burn transactions was fixed.

### Router

Router is the workhorse behind the scenes, transferring packets, accepting offers from Hotspots to
send packets, communicating with Console to ensure Data Credit balances are correct, and many other
functions.

In the LoRaWAN world, Router provides the equivalent functions as Network Server, Join Server, and
Application Server, while also communicating with the Helium Blockchain.

The HNT and DC arbitrage situation inspired users to send as much data as possible, and Router took
the brunt of those packet requests.

#### Issues and fixes

Issue: Devices trouble joining or issues with downlinks.

Fix: For initial join or when downlink is queued provided an update that allows the system to choose
among several packets and pick the best one to downlink through based on signal strength.

Issue: Accepting incorrect offers of packets from Hotspots.

Fix: Router validation of packet offers was moved upfront.

Issue: Router performance struggled to keep up with the number of requests while synchronizing with
state channels.

Fix: Optimization and performance patches deployed to reduce disk writes and decrease response
times; in addition dropped redundant load from Router.

### State Channels

State channels are side chains used to handle the accounting and verification for Data Credit
transactions and ensure these transactions are added to the main blockchain in an efficient manner.

The volume of micro-transactions between devices, Hotspots, and the blockchain makes account
handling and verification impossible to scale on the main blockchain. Active open state channels are
necessary for data to transfer.

State channels necessary for packets to transfer as these microtransactions involving Data Credits
are accounted for on these state channels.

#### Issues and fixes

Issue: State channels not opening and closing in sync with each other.

Fix: The number of state channels was increased from 2 to 5 to help ensure an active state channel
will be open at all times.

Issue: State channel timing misaligned with epoch reward blocks; state channels remained open too
long.

Fix: State channels were updated to open and close faster: the number of blocks that a state channel
remains open was also reduced, currently 40 blocks.

The Garbage Collector (GC) is used to perform cleanup of the ledger and free up memory.

Issue: GC was out of sync with the state channels open and close cycle preventing new state channels
opening.

Fix: Garbage Collector was initially set to perform cleanup every 100 blocks, but clean up was made
dynamic using a chain variable, and set to 10 to align the closing of state channels.

Issue: Packet loss and devices trouble rejoining.

Fix: An incorrect causality check in the state channel client that caused packet loss was addressed.
A function to only add a causally newer version of the state channel to the local state channel
database was added.
