---
layout: post
title: 'Miner Release: Flatline Fix and Prepare to Disable Chain Sync'
date: 2022-06-10
hide_table_of_contents: true
authors: [cokes518, ke6jjj, abhay]
---

The core developers have tagged a new `2022.06.09.0` `miner` release. This release contains fixes to
the packet issue identified in the last release by bumping the gateway-rs version to `alpha-27`,
fixes a crash in ebus (more on this below), and a "flatline" fix (more on this below).

<!--truncate-->

&nbsp;

# Enabling Mux

- Makers must enable mux explicitly in their docker overlay by adding
  `{gateway_and_mux_enable, true}` to your configuration file under the miner application block

# Summary of Flatline and Ebus fixes

These two issues have been causing various crashes and out of memory errors on Hotspots that have
been preventing them from participating in network and potentially causing "flatline" reports in the
community.

More details are below but the team has identified an issue where Hotspots were talking to both the
Mainnet and Testnet causing a Hotspot to run out of memory. Additionally, a Hotspot can crash due to
a latent bug in the bluetooth stack. Both of these issues have been fixed.

## Ebus Crash

The network is in the middle of transitioning from Full (chain syncing Hotspots running Erlang-based
miners) Hotspots to Light (no chain sync, running a rust-based gateway) Hotspots. In this middle
period, the Hotspot itself uses both erlang-based and rust-based components. The core team chose to
transition this way to avoid disruptions and ease the transition over a period of time. One of the
components that needs to transition over is called "ebus".

### What is ebus?

ebus is used to communicate to Manufacturer Hotspot mobile applications over Bluetooth to run
diagnostics and perform the initial onboarding. During onboarding and running diagnostic reports,
ebus asks for the Hotspot's block height so it can return that information (over Bluetooth) back to
the user.

### Explaining the problem

Before Light Hotspots, ebus would ask the erlang-based miner what the block height is and it would
return that information. However, now that Hotspots get their chain information from Validators
using a protocol called gRPC, ebus (still talking to the erlang-based miner) thinks there is no
block height at all, and crashes.

The fix is to tell ebus to talk to the Validator using the new rust-based gateway using gRPC.

## "Flatline" Fix

The core team had been chasing down the flatline fix for a while and we're optimistic that this will
resolve the issue.

### Some background on Seed Nodes and Peerbooks

All Hotspots, when they first boot up and connect to the internet, connect to a seed node (think of
it like a directory of all Hotspots and Validators on the network). These seed nodes share a peer
book that provide routing information for the Hotspots (like directions to a store).

There are both Testnet seed nodes and Mainnet seed nodes that exist, providing peer book information
to whichever Hotspot requests it.

### Explaining the problem

When Hotspots participate in Proof-of-Coverage, they often need to look up where to send the
receipt, so they ask a seed node. The problem arises when both Testnet and Mainnet seed nodes
respond.

Some Hotspots are unable to untangle the mix of seed nodes responding back to them, filling up their
memory, and completely exhausting any available memory they have, causing a "flatline".

The fix is to separate out the crosstalk and ensure only Mainnet seed nodes respond to a Mainnet
Hotspot.

For a more technical explanation, see "Flatline: Detailed Discussion".

#### Related PRs

[#1390](https://github.com/helium/blockchain-core/pull/1390) Prevent Testnet and Mainnet crosstalk
that caused, on boot, the Hotspot miner to think its peer book database is in a legacy byte order
state and needs to be reconverted to reversed byte order.
[#439](https://github.com/helium/erlang-libp2p/pull/439) Fixes bug that caused memory issues in
peerbook [#1381](https://github.com/helium/blockchain-core/pull/1381) Fixes Poc Targeting and
Filtering [#1723](https://github.com/helium/miner/pull/1723) Fixes an ebus crash on miner as it
tries to get `block_height` and other ledger-related params.

### Plan

We have been testing `2022.06.09.0` on Mainnet since June 9 3pm PT. Current ETA for GA is June 10,
2022 12:00pm PT.

### "Flatline": Detailed Discussion

To participate in the network effectively, Hotspots must communicate with any one of several
Validators for various services. But to do so, the Hotspot must first obtain a directory listing,
also called a peer book, of all available Validators and Hotspots on the network. It obtains the
most up-to-date peer book by contacting any other Hotspot or Validator and asking for one. If a
Hotspot doesn't have any directory listing to begin with, it will contact any one of several special
Seed Nodes to download one. Once downloaded, a Hotspot will save its peer book to disk so that it
can avoid having to ask for a full peer book from a seed on reboot. As the Hotspot hears about
changes to the peer book it will update its local copy to keep it in sync.

The format of the peer book disk database underwent a change long ago, and to accomodate that
change, Hotspots first attempt to check whether the peer book appears to be in the older or newer
format at start up. If the Hotspot believes its database format is of the older version, it attempts
to correct the database at start up by completely rewriting it. When this "upgrade" code was written
the peer book was so small that it could effectively have been loaded entirely into memory first
before being corrected. Nowadays, however, the database is so large that when the "upgrade" code
runs it exhausts all memory on the Hotspot, causing it to crash. Fortunately, the upgrade code
hasn't been needed for quite some time, so it rarely runs, and rarely causes the crash.

Unfortunately, however, the upgrade code can be activated accidentally if there are unusual peer
book entries in the database. Some hotspots have unfortunately started collecting unusual entries in
their peer books due to a couple of additional problems that had been occuring with Seed Nodes, one
of which is that they had been delivering peer books filled with both mainnet and testnet Validator
and Hotspot addresses. Once a Hotspot receives and stores these unusual peer book entries, it can
get in a state such that it continuously tries to "upgrade" its peer book, over and over, at
startup. Since the upgrade itself causes a crash, the Hotspot cannot get itself out of this loop (in
the affected versions).

The solution to the issue is several fold.

1. Remove the "upgrade" code altogether. It simply isn't needed.
2. Prevent Seed Nodes from accumulating and propagating listings for peers outside their network
   type (testnet vs mainnet).
3. Prevent Seed Nodes from accumulating and propogating _empty_ peer book listings.
