---
layout: post
title: 'Network Disruption Postmortem: 2022-08-08'
date: 2022-08-15 17:00 -0700
hide_table_of_contents: true
authors: [jdgemm]
---

&nbsp;

# What happened

On Monday 2022-08-08 at approximately 19:34 PM UTC Validators stopped producing blocks at block
`1,469,951` and a chain halt occurred. Normal chain operations resumed at approximately 08:00 AM UTC
just over 7 hours later.

<!--truncate-->

Throughout the disruption, devices continued to transfer data and operate normally. There were no
risks to Hotspot owners or HNT holders, but they did experience a halt in transaction processing,
for example, adding and transferring Hotspots, asserting location, and completing payment and burn
transactions.

# Cause

The latest chain variable activation revealed a previously unknown chain variable update hook bug
which caused the chain to halt. This chain variable was intended to disable legacy Hotspot indexing
operation in accordance with HIP 54, h3dex poc targeting.

# Recovery

The team identified the issue and requested operators of Validators in the Consensus Group to
restart.

However, although a restart resolved the issue during testing, on mainnet a restart did not resolve
the issue and the core team issued an emergency Validator release, `v1.13.5`. This release disabled
the variable update hook and included a new blessed snapshot, generated on a chain follower with the
hook disabled.

Validators were requested to upgrade to the emergency release, and those in the Consensus Group were
instructed to manually load the new snapshot.

Once the Consensus Groupâ€™s ledgers were in agreement, the block skip process allowed the chain to
begin moving again, but with a lower number of transactions compared to normal operations

# Resolution

Following Validator release `v1.13.5`, which addressed the variable update hook issue, release
`v1.1.158` for ETL maintainers and `v1.1.70` for Blockchain Node operators were issued on 2022-08-09
at 5:38 AM and 5:49 AM UTC, respectively, along with a snapshot to synchronize users past the halt.

Certain Validators who updated after the chain resumed experienced ledger drift, which caused
Validators to go offline and remain halted. The team decided to issue release `v1.13.6` as a
non-mandatory release for halted Validators. This enabled the chain to continue to progress more
normally as Validators updated, aligned with the latest blocks based on the latest snapshot.

The average PoC rate before the halt was ~270 receipts per block. The post-halt average initially
moved up to 210 receipts per block because of grpc blocking by certain Validators. Validators have
unblocked grpc connections and PoC receipts have returned to normal operations.

The team provided an updated Validator release `v1.13.7` which included a number of performance
updates, but also included a fix to prevent the variable update hook issue from recurring.

# Power of Community

We want to extend our deep appreciation to our community members that host Validators. Thank you for
your attentiveness and willingness to troubleshoot issues that affect the entire network. Your
efforts and support move the network forward.

# Timeline of Key Announcements

Throughout the disruption, the team worked to keep users up to date on the status and required
actions.

**2022-08-08** **19:34 PM UTC** Discovery and investigation of chain halt that occurred at block
height `1,469,951` as a result of activating the latest chain variable.

**20:26 PM UTC** Core team requests Validators in the Consensus Group to restart their Validators in
order to resume block production.

**22:45 PM UTC** Chain halt again at block `1,469,988`, continued exploration by the core team into
causes and solutions.

**2022-08-09** **03:04 AM UTC** Emergency release `v1.13.5` sent to Validators which included a new
snapshot that all Validators were required to sync to in order to realign to block `1,469,990`.

**05:09 AM UTC** Block moving at slow rates (approx 10% of normal transaction rate). No reward block
yet, team monitoring. Testing for ETL and Node releases.

**05:49 AM UTC** Release `v1.1.158` for ETL maintainers and `v1.1.70` for Blockchain Node operators
issued along with corresponding snapshot to synchronize users past the chain halt.

**08:02 AM UTC** Chain progressing as expected, PoC rate to continue to drift back to normal rates
(approx 270 receipts per block) over time.

**18:31 PM UTC** Ledger drift identified among Validators that updated after chain resumed. Core
team issues release `v1.13.6` for general availability containing a newer blessed snapshot for any
Validators that are halted because of ledger drift.

**2022-08-10** **22:34 PM UTC** Core team delivers beta release `v1.13.7` for Validators. This
release included a number of performance updates, but also included a fix to prevent the varhook
issue from recurring.
