---
layout: post
title: 'Network Disruption Postmortem: 2022-10-19'
date: 2022-10-20 17:00 -0700
hide_table_of_contents: true
authors: [jdgemm]
---

&nbsp;

# What happened

On Wednesday 2022-10-19 at approximately 2:20 AM UTC Validators stopped producing blocks at block
`1,575,935` and a chain halt occurred. Consequently, at 5:55 AM UTC a second chain halt occurred at
block 1,575,955. Normal chain operations resumed approximately 5.5 hours later at 7:49 AM.

<!--truncate-->

Throughout the disruption, Hotspots did not participate in Proof-of-Coverage. All funds were safe,
but pending transactions were delayed until the halt was resolved. Pending Transactions include
adding a Hotspot, changing a Hotspot Location, transferring a Hotspot, payments, and token burns.
During the disruption, data transfer was largely unaffected by the chain halt.

# Cause

The core team identified a root cause of slow blocks. The string of slow blocks triggered a latent
bug in Hotspots to continually reach out to Validators for the latest block information and not back
off when they received a block they perceived as stale.

# Recovery

The temporary solution was to block gRPC port (default 8080) so Hotspots stopped making requests to
Validators and allowed Validators to resume block production. Once block production resumed,
Validators were requested to gradually reopen gRPC port(s) across their fleets.

There was a second halt after this that the team decided required a new Validator release. The
problem was some nodes were still online, but unable to absorb blocks because they were running out
of file handles. This led to several members of the Consensus Group unable to follow the chain. The
Hotspot swarming issue is believed to be a secondary effect of the file-handle issue that initially
caused slow blocks.

The core team then tagged mandatory release v1.15.6. This release included a patch to fix a latent
bug in environments where multiple Validator instances may have been running on the same machine
causing a resource exhaustion (due to too many open files on the server).

Validator operators then were asked to gradually re-enable the gRPC port (default 8080).

# Resolution

In order to prevent this from happening again, we are implementing several changes. The first,
released in `v1.15.6`, fixed what is believed to be the original bug.

Following that, we plan to make the system more resilient to gRPC storms both on the Hotspot and the
Validator side.

# Power of Community

Thank you again to our Validator community for working with us and acting swiftly to help resolve
this issue. Your continued dedication and support has such a huge positive impact on the entire
Helium community that does not go unnoticed.

# Timeline of Key Announcements

Throughout the disruption, the team worked to keep users up to date on the status and required
actions. All below times in UTC.

**2022-10-19** **2:20 AM** Core team started to investigate the first chain halt at block height
`1,575,935` with a plan to update the community as soon as they learned more.

**3:00 AM** Root cause was identified and the core team began to work with the Validator community
to resume block production.

**4:07 AM** It was believed the root cause stemmed from Hotspots constantly reaching out to
Validators was due to a latent bug triggered by a series of slow blocks. Validators were requested
to close the communication channel that Hotspots use to get ledger information and challenges.

Once block production resumed, Validators were instructed to gradually reopen ports across their
fleets to communicate with Hotspots once again.

**5:55 AM** Chain halted a second time at block height `1,575,955`. The network hit the same issue
that was cleared earlier and was most likely the root cause of the initial outage. The core team and
Validator operators in the community worked together to investigate.

**7:23 AM** The core developers and the Validator community identified the root cause of chain halt
(and the prior one) and a new Validator release, `v1.15.6`, was prepared. In the meantime, a hotfix
was applied to certain Validators in the Consensus Group and block production resumed.

**7:29 AM** The core team tagged mandatory release `v1.15.6`. This release included a patch to fix a
latent bug in environments where multiple validator instances may have been running on the same
machine causing a resource exhaustion. Validator operators were requested to upgrade to v1.15.6
without delay as failure to upgrade could result in another chain halt.

**7:32 AM** Validators were notified to gradually re-enable gRPC port (default 8080) across their
fleets.

**7:49 AM** The Validator release was issued and block production continued. All Validator operators
were urged to follow upgrade instructions to `v1.15.6`.
