---
id: datacake
sidebar_label: Datacake
slug: /use-the-network/console/integrations/datacake
---

# Datacake

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl'

[Datacake](https://datacake.co) is a multi-purpose, low-code IoT platform that requires no
programming skills and minimal time to create custom IoT applications. You can sign up for a free
account at [https://datacake.co](https://datacake.co).

To add the integration in Console, go to **Integrations** on the left-hand menu. Select the
integration to add - in this case, the **Datacake** integration as shown below.

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    'img/use-the-network/console/integrations/integrations-datacake-selectdatacake.png',
  )}
/>

To integrate Helium Console with Datacake, you'll need to input your **personal access token** from
Datacake. When you register on the Datacake platform and create a user account, a token is
automatically created. You can view your own token via the User Settings Menu. You can reach this
menu by clicking on "Edit Profile" at the end of the list using the Workspace Selector:

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    'img/use-the-network/console/integrations/integrations-datacake-accessprofile.png',
  )}
/>

You will now see a menu where you can make your personal account settings. There is also a sidebar
and in this you will find the item "API". If you click on it, you will find your personal access
token there:

<img
  src={useBaseUrl('img/use-the-network/console/integrations/integrations-datacake-showapikey.png')}
/>

Copy this value into the **Enter Datacake Token** field in Console for the integration configuration
shown below.

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    'img/use-the-network/console/integrations/integrations-datacake-enteraccesstoken.png',
  )}
/>

Set a name for the integration in step 3. You will use this name to identify the integration when
attaching it to devices. Simply calling the integration 'Datacake' is sufficient for most
implementations.

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    'img/use-the-network/console/integrations/integrations-datacake-nameintegration.png',
  )}
/>

## Connecting Integrations to Devices

Devices or groups of devices (via labels) can be directly connected to integrations on the Flows
Worskpace. Labels are identifiers used to group devices for easy management. To connect one or more
devices to one or more integrations, simply connect the Device and Integration nodes on the Flows
Workspace.

:::info

Quick video tutorial connecting devices to an integration
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lnERw1f7TGE).

:::

Node elements (devices, labels, integrations) need to be created before they're available on the
Flows Workspace. More information about Flows
[here](https://docs.helium.com/use-the-network/console/flows/).
