Mobile PoC Working Group Charter

Why Mobile PoC Working Group The success of the MOBILE network is critically tied to our ability to
quickly build and roll out an effective proof-of-coverage framework that incentivizes useful
coverage. HIP74 laid some groundwork, but it is necessary to quickly iterate and improve the
framework beyond the fundamentals outlined in HIP74. To get there quickly, yet empower active
participation and influence of the process by the community, we want to organize a Mobile PoC
Working Group.

Mission The goal of the Mobile PoC Working Group is to work collaboratively on the HIPs that improve
and advance the Proof-of-Coverage framework used by the MOBILE subDAO to ultimately drive incentives
for creating useful coverage.

Team Mobile POC Working Group will consist of 5-10 members voted in by the Community on Discord.
Members interested in participating will have a week to nominate themself by submitting 3-5
sentences about themselves and their motivation to join the Group in the following form:
https://forms.gle/JTqCHpHPAzkq4vMs7 As a pilot, members will be elected for three months, and after,
a new Group will be voted in. There’s no limit on how many times one member can be part of the
Group. The three-month period is just an initial time frame that can be reevaluated as we better
understand what works for the Group. The team will meet weekly for 30 minutes to work on developing
Mobile POC HIPs. Prior to activation/implementation, all HIPs will still need to be voted on by the
community, following the established voting process. I.e., The PoC Working Group will not have the
ability to vote/enact HIPs without formal community voting. Moderation will be done by one of the
group members willing to take on the role. Helium Foundation will do dedicated channels, events, and
other organizational help.

Process Anyone can propose HIP ideas. If the Group members decide it’s worth taking it to the next
level and presenting it to the broader Community, the process of HIP writing starts. Every new HIP
should follow the template in the HIPs GitHub repo:
https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0000-template.md To kickstart the process, we propose the
Group start with Mobile Mappers HIP, which will define how Mappers will be mapping hexes, what is
rewarding criteria, etc.
