---
id: voting
title: Voting
pagination_label: Voting
sidebar_label: Voting
description: Helium Documentation
image: https://docs.helium.com/img/link-image.png
slug: /governance/voting
---

import LegacyContentBanner from '@site/src/theme/LegacyContentBanner'

<LegacyContentBanner />

To go from a proposed HIP to a vote, the Helium Community follows the process initially laid out in
HIP 7. Rough consensus and running code are critical factors for achieving approval. Rough consensus
is achieved In partnership with HIP Authors, as well as non-binding Temperature Checks in the Helium
Discord. Temperature Checks allow the community and all stakeholders discussing the HIP to signal
readiness or suggest more time for discussion. HIPs progress through different stages, including
Draft, In Discussion, Approved, Deployed, or Rejected.

Read the HIP 7 Process here: https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0007-managing-hip-process.md

## Blockchains + On-Chain Voting

The Helium Network, uses on-chain voting to maximize inclusive participation and maintain a publicly
auditable voting record. On-chain voting means storing a piece of data on a Blockchain. The
Blockchain acts as an immutable ledger. To store data on a Blockchain, users must pay a small
transaction fee, which covers the data storage cost permanently. The Helium Network utilizes the
Solana Blockchain for blockchain-based data storage. The Solana Blockchain has fast processing times
and low fees, keeping costs accessible to all participants for small transactions like voting and
governance. Storing voting data on a Blockchain ensures transparency and immutability of the voting
process.

Today, the Helium Network utilizes the tool Helium Vote for on-chain voting. Since the passage of
HIP 51- 53, the Helium Network established the distinction between Networks and subNetworks,
currently represented by a token for each. HIP 51 - 53 also established the Vote Escrowed Model of
token Staking for Voting Power.

## The veToken model

The veToken model originated from Curve (veCRV) as a native token initiating a lockup and creating
voting rights. Curve’s native token is CRV and has three functions: voting, staking, and boosting
yield. To perform any of those functions, CRV is required to be locked in the form of veCRV. The
"ve" in veToken stands for "Voter/vote escrowed." Today, this model has been emulated by various
DeFi protocols within many Layer 1 ecosystems. The Helium Network has adopted the model originally
introduced and passed by the community in HIP 51.

The veToken initiatives within the Helium Network serve two primary purposes: maximizing rewards,
specifically for protocol emission earnings and governance. Governance seeks to establish the best
outcomes for new projects, new initiatives, and for the future of decentralized wireless.

## The Value of veTokens for Governance

In the context of the Helium Network, the veToken model’s primary use is to establish voting
strength and governance rights. The additional on-chain object (the veToken) represents that
wallet’s voting strength.

The veToken model requires users to stake the underlying token, locking the tokens up for a period
of up to four years. The longer the staking period, the greater the voting strength. By locking up
tokens, economic interests and voting rights are effectively aligned. The native token holders
retain the tokens' economic value and utility, while the veToken assumes the voting rights. All
Helium veTokens are non-transferable, ‘soulbound,’ and have zero intrinsic economic value. They are
represented by an NFT in your Helium Wallet App.

Visit Helium Vote, the Helium Network, and subNetworks at:

- Helium (HNT): [https://heliumvote.com/hnt](https://heliumvote.com/hnt)
- IoT subNetwork (IOT): [https://heliumvote.com/iot](https://heliumvote.com/iot)
- Mobile subNetwork (MOBILE): [https://heliumvote.com/mobile](https://heliumvote.com/mobile)

## Staking

To vote in the Helium Network for changes to either the Network at large, the IoT (LoRaWAN)
subNetwork, or the Mobile (5G) subNetwork, a participant must stake tokens: HNT, IOT, or MOBILE
tokens.

Staking is a process of locking up a token amount (as little as one token) for a specific period of
time in an on-chain program on the Solana Blockchain. This program defines the parameters for
lockup. In the Helium Network and subNetworks, users can stake tokens for up to 4 years. Staking
allows users to make a commitment to the future, creating long-term alignment to increase the value
of the Network.

:::note How to stake tokens

For a full walkthrough on how to stake your tokens to the Helium Network or one of its subNetworks,
see the [Helium Vote Staking](/governance/faq) guide.

:::

## Voting Power

Specific network tokens will give you Voting Power in the designated Network or subNetworks. Voting
Power is your token amount multiplied by the duration of a lock-up period. Voting Power creates a
weight of your vote against others. This Voting Power enables those with strong incentive alignment
with the network to have greater influence over governance decisions. The function of staking and
Voting Power applies to any new subNetworks in the future, as per the community-passed and approved
HIP 51.

---

## Vote Escrowed Positions as NFTs

When you stake a token, you'll receive a veToken position in your wallet. ‘ve’ represents the Vote
Escrowed position created by staking your tokens for a voting power multiplier. For all users, the
veToken positions will be shown in a web3 wallet as Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs). They are not
tradable or transferable and are considered ‘soulbound’ to your wallet. Vote Escrowed simply means
the tokens sit in an escrow period until the staking, or locking, position is over and is only to be
used for voting and governance while in escrow.

### veHNT

The [Helium Network](https://heliumvote.com/hnt) serve as the overarching system that enables a
multitude of networks (subNetworks) to exist. As such, veHNT's role in network governance is in
matters affecting the entire network. For example, a proposal affecting HNT emissions would be voted
on using veHNT.

Additionally, veHNT can be [delegated](/governance/staking-with-realms#delegating-stakes) to a
subNetwork in order to earn a portion of that network's tokens.

### veIOT

The [IOT subNetwork](https://heliumvote.com/iot) focuses on the original vision of the Helium
Network, supporting the growth and development of IoT devices and applications. Staking your IOT
tokens to the IOT subNetwork grants veIOT which can be used to vote on matters specific to the IOT
network. For example, a proposal affecting proof of coverage behavior for IoT Hotspots.

### veMOBILE

The [MOBILE subNetwork](https://heliumvote.com/mobile) is dedicated to the growth and expansion of
the Helium Network in the mobile and telecommunications sectors. Staking your MOBILE tokens to the
MOBILE subNetwork grants veMOBILE which can be used to vote on matters specific to the MOBILE
network. For example, a proposal affecting proof of coverage behavior for MOBILE Hotspots.

---

## Supermajority

A proposition is deemed 'Approved' and accepted by the community if it achieves a super-majority of
67% of the Voting Power. This is not a new rule for the Helium Community and was first established
in Phase 2 of Governance.

The duration for which a proposal must be made available for voting is not predetermined. Generally,
voting occurs within seven days.

## Quorum

A quorum of tokens represented must be met to certify the proposal as a valid outcome. The quorum is
100,000,000 tokens represented at the time of the vote in the vote results. This quorum is equal
across the Network and all subNetworks. If a proposal does not reach this quorum, the proposal will
automatically fail. Even if the proposal received a 66% super majority of Voting Power, the proposal
did not reach quorum and therefore is invalidated.
