---
id: 5g-on-helium
hide_title: true
sidebar_label: Introduction
slug: /5g-on-helium
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl'

<img className="docsheader" src={useBaseUrl('img/5g-on-helium/5gheader.png')} />

# 5G On Helium

Today all mobile networks are built top-down by service providers (e.g., AT&T and Verizon in the
United States). Future networks will likely be a hybrid of large-scaled operators and people-owned
5G Hotspots due to demands of consumer behavior (higher bandwidth and lower latency requirements)
and the physics of wireless radio. More data on the wireless network requires higher frequency
bands, which requires denser networks with more nodes, which further increases the cost of site
acquisition.

The Helium model decentralizes site acquisition costs and enables communities to participate in
building reliable, high bandwidth networks using technologies like CBRS and Wi-Fi. This doesnâ€™t
completely replace service providers altogether. Instead, we see service providers as a critical
component of this ecosystem.

## CBRS Radios

Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) is a wide broadcast 3.5Ghz band in the United States that
does not require a tower operator to acquire spectrum licenses.

More information about CBRS can be found on the
[Federal Communications Commission Website](https://www.fcc.gov/35-ghz-band-overview)

5G Hotspots can participate in providing 5G cellular coverage when connected to Indoor or Outdoor
CBRS Small Cell Radios while also participating in providing LoRaWAN coverage.

:::info

[Helium Discord](https://discord.gg/helium) is the best place to get real-time support from the
community.

The [#5g-cbrs](discord://discord.com/channels/404106811252408320/836735476659912754) channel is most
relevant for using the Network.

:::

### Outdoor Small Cells

These Small Cell Radios are more Powerful than Indoor Small Cell Radios and are typically
weatherized to endure the elements. Outdoor Small Cell Radios create a larger area of 5G coverage
while requiring a bit more planning when installing and maintaining.

Outdoor Small Cells require installation above ground level and require registration with the
Spectrum Access System (SAS) to operate. Please be sure to evaluate your locations and ability to
install these Small Cell Radios, and consider hiring a professional to ensure your installation is
secure and meets all regulatory requirements.

SAS registration is expected to be completed within 24 hours of submission, Hotspot Owners will be
contacted via email with a confirmation of successful registration, or with a rejection reply and an
explanation of what needs to be corrected.

### Indoor Small Cells

These less powerful Small Cell Radios are ideal for indoor installations, such as coffee shops,
bars, grocery stores, etc. Indoor Small Cell Radios are generally easier to install and create a
shorter range, localized area of 5G coverage.

Indoor Small Cell Radios are physically smaller radios and can be installed at any height. It is
Installing an Indoor Small Cell outdoors is not recommended as they are not weather resistant.

## Network of Networks

With the passing of
[HIP 51: Helium DAOs](https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0051-helium-dao.md) a general
structure for onboarding new Decentralized Network Protocols (DNPs) to the broader Helium Network
was created. The Helium Mobile DAO with Helium 5G Hotspots are the first step in the evolution of
the Helium ecosystem.

## Helium 5G Rollout

The passing of [HIP 51: Helium DAO](https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0051-helium-dao.md)
allows for the creation of MOBILE tokens that will reward 5G Hotspot operators on the existing
Helium blockchain. This will immediately allow any online 5G Hotspot with a Small Cell Radio to mine
MOBILE tokens.

50B of 250B MOBILE is pre-mined as specified in the
[Economics Overview](https://github.com/helium/HIP/blob/main/0053-mobile-dao.md#economics-overview)
and deposited to the Helium Foundation.
