---
id: dragino-lht65
hide_title: true
sidebar_label: Dragino LHT65
slug: /use-the-network/devices/ready-to-use/dragino-lht65
---

import useBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";

## Dragino LHT65

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    "img/use-the-network/devices/ready-to-use/dragino-lht65-banner.jpg"
  )}
/>

Multi Sensor Device with Built in Temperature and Humidity Sensor

### Introduction

The Dragino LHT65 is a multi-sensor device which includes a built in temperature
and humidity sensor as well as an external sensor connector which supports
sensors such as temperature, soil moisture, tilting, and illumination. The
device includes a non-chargeable battery that can last for more than 10 years.

### Resources

[Product Page](https://www.dragino.com/products/lora-lorawan-end-node/item/151-lht65.html)

[Datasheet](https://www.dragino.com/downloads/downloads/LHT65/Datasheet_LHT65_LoRaWAN_Temperature_Humidity_Sensor.pdf)

[Manual](https://www.dragino.com/downloads/downloads/LHT65/LHT65_Temperature_Humidity_Sensor_UserManual_v1.7.1.pdf)

### Add Device to Console

To start, you'll need to add your device to Console. You should have been
provided with a DevEUI, AppEUI, and AppKey inside the device packaging. Follow
our quickstartfor instructions on how to add a new device to Console.

### Join Device to Network

Your device will be in a deep sleep mode when you receive it. To activate the
device and place it in a normal operating state, hold down the ACT button for
three seconds until you see the LED blink green five times quickly. The
operating mode table is shown below for reference.

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    "img/use-the-network/devices/ready-to-use/dragino-lht65-diagram.png"
  )}
/>

The device should now begin attempting to join the network. Within a minute or
two you should see an activation event on the Console device page as shown
below. The device LED will also show solid green for five seconds after it has
joined.

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    "img/use-the-network/devices/ready-to-use/dragino-lht65-activation.png"
  )}
/>

Once you have seen an event similar to above, your device is now joined to the
network and will send its sensor values every ten minutes by default. The
transmit frequency and many more settings can be changed, please refer to the
manual for instructions.

### myDevices Cayenne

If you would like to easily view your device's data on a web or mobile dashboard
for free, this device is supported out of the box by myDevices Cayenne via the
integration on Console. You can learn how to quickly setup this integration
here.

### Decode Device Payload

When this device transmits its data, it does so in a space efficient manner by
packing the bytes of data in a specific way so that no space is wasted, learn
more about this in our short primer
[here](https://developer.helium.com/console/functions#a-primer-on-encoding-and-decoding).
The manufacture of this device, Dragino, is using their own encoding scheme to
define which bytes hold which piece of data. Below is a table taken from the
manual showing the size and location of each piece of data.

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    "img/use-the-network/devices/ready-to-use/dragino-lht65-byte-packing.png"
  )}
/>

If you would like to decode the device payload to view it in Console or send to
your own application, this section will show you how. We'll be using a Console
Function Decoder to unpack the device payload into a human readable form, you
can learn more about Functions in general here).

#### Create Function Decoder

Lets begin by creating a new custom function decoder. First enter a name, select
decoder for function type, and finally custom script since we'll be inputting
our own script. Next, remove the template custom script, and copy and paste the
entire script found
[here](https://www.dragino.com/downloads/downloads/LHT65/payload_decode/ttn_payload_decode_v1.7.txt)into
the script editor. Last, create a label that we'll use to attach this decoder to
the device with.

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    "img/use-the-network/devices/ready-to-use/dragino-lht65-decoder.png"
  )}
/>

#### Attaching Function Decoder

Next navigate to the device page and attach the label we just created for the
function decoder as shown below.

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    "img/use-the-network/devices/ready-to-use/dragino-lht65-attach-decoder.png"
  )}
/>

#### Viewing Decoded Device Data

Once you have attached the decoder we can now open the Debug window to view the
decoded device payload in the received uplink. You can learn more about the
Debug tool here. To open the Debug window just click on the bug icon on the
right side of the device page. Once you have the Debug window open you can wait
for the next packet to transmit or force a manual transmission by holding down
the ACT button for more then one second and less then three. You'll see the LED
turn green while you hold it down and then it should turn red briefly after
releasing. You should see the uplink message with the decoded fields as shown
below.

<img
  src={useBaseUrl(
    "img/use-the-network/devices/ready-to-use/dragino-lht65-decoded-payload.png"
  )}
/>

### Sending Device Payload to Your Application

To learn more about how to send the device data payload to your own application
checkout the Console integrations here.
